---
title: An Open Letter to the Trustees of Harvey Mudd Cellege
author: Travis Athougies
published: true
tags: "harvey mudd college, education, academia"
---

The following is the text of a letter I sent to the trustees of Harvey Mudd College:

Hello Jim,

My name is Travis Athougies and I am a Harvey Mudd College graduate from 2014, as is my wife. You
may remember me as I was at several trustee meetings serving as both ASHMC treasurer in 2012-2013
and then president 2013-2014. I recently learned you are now the chair of the board of
trustees. Congratulations and thanks for your service!

I am writing because I was recently informed by a fellow alum about the following incident:

<https://www.claremontindependent.com/post/protests-injure-four-staff-members-at-harvey-mudd-career-fair>

Put simply, we are extremely disappointed but unfortunately not surprised.

Even more disappointed, but again, not surprised are we that the immediate steps of the presidents
office were to provide support for the group of instigators rather than the actual victims here -
the normal students trying to find career and internship opportunities.

From my view as a recent enough student and alumni, this is just the latest escalation in problems
that have remained in place since my own time at Harvey Mudd. Of course, this incident resulted in
flat out violence and assault (and hopefully criminal charges).

Contrary to how these instigators portray themselves, they are contributing to a toxic environment
at the college that makes it an unsafe environment for many students who are cowed into silence.

If I'm honest with myself, my time at Harvey Mudd was littered with small threats against my basic
safety for holding views in line with large parts of the American public. For example, I still
recall several threats of violence against various public figures giving talks during my time at the
5Cs (including threats against students interested in attending), as well as student rhetoric
threatening violence against those who held different viewpoints. Moreover, the tolerance for
violence that Mudd generally held towards its students meant that intolerable behavior, like assault
of police officers by underage drunken students or drug-induced nocturnal manic episodes or non
consensual exposure to various tacitly dorm-approved sexual hazing rituals, were an unfortunately
common occurrence.

During my college years as a young adult, the result was that Mudd essentially normalized the
intolerable and made for a very unsafe environment on campus. To make matters worse, the
administration, instead of making the environment safer for the majority of students, would choose,
as it again did here, to provide endless support and sympathy for the very groups responsible for
the threats. There is a solid culture of don't ask, don't tell at Harvey Mudd that would not be
tolerated at other non-profits I have worked with. As the now father of three young children,
looking back at my college years, I sometimes wonder -- where were the adults?  Frankly, with news
like this coming out and given my own experience, one seriously considers sending their own children
to their alma mater.

Mudd's technical excellence is unquestioned, but all too often, professors themselves become the
target of student rage. I know of at least one professor who has left because of the intolerant
environment created by certain groups on campus.

So again, I ask... Where are the adults?

We cannot look at incidents like these and say they are isolated. They are not. The trustees need to
step in and force real changes to make the environment at Harvey Mudd welcoming to students from all
backgrounds. We cannot let the loudest voices in the room make all the decisions while their demands
tacitly terrorize the rest of the school.

Again, we cannot look at these incidents and ignore them by citing academic free thought. Violence
is not free speech. And moreover, a commitment to academia means creating an environment where
students actually feel safe to think without threats of violence against them and staff.

If I recall from my various trustee meetings and interaction with members of the advancement office,
Harvey Mudd had a problem with getting people to donate after they've left. My wife and I support
various educational causes but have not donated to Mudd. My feeling after speaking with alumni and
my recollection talking with the advancement staff at the time makes me realize that there's a
silent message that no one wants to say, but I'm just going to make it obvious:

The alumni who make the money are not coming from these groups that the President's office is
'supporting'. Mudd needs to make a choice to support the people it wants to eventually become
individuals who support it. Alumni are embarrassed when their school becomes known for these
incidents rather than what we all came there for: math, science, and education.

The Harvey Mudd mission mandates that its students understand the impact of their work on
society. The students behind this incident barely comprehend the impact of their work on their
peers. Are these the kinds of students we want? At some point, the admissions department needs to be
held accountable for being ultimately responsible for creating this toxic environment. I would hope
the trustees instigate an actual investigation into what qualities led to the radicalization of
these students and institute policies that mean such radicals won't again be allowed to terrorize
students and staff.

Again, we cannot look at the school, pat ourselves on the back that these incidents happen
elsewhere, and then move on. While true, there are echos of similar incidents throughout the
country, I once again call to mind our mission statement, which is to create students capable of
understanding their impact on the world. If Harvey Mudd wants to lead and not simply follow, then
Harvey Mudd needs to take the reins here and show that there is a different way. By doing so, we
will create a better environment for students, faculty, and staff.

Travis Athougies HM '14
